---
layout: "post"
title: "Die Vorsorgelüge"
date: "2026-04-28"
published: true
---

**Author:** Holger Balodis & Dagmar Hühne | **Category:** Wirtschaft## WHAT'S IN IT FOR YOU: UNDERSTAND THE PENSION JUNGLE AND FIND A WAY THROUGH IT.

The big worry about demographic change is talked about everywhere. For many years, many politicians and experts agree that the old idea of a generation contract with a state pension will no longer work. If you trust the old way where young people pay pensions for the old, you may end up poor in old age. The solution seems easy: private pension plans are now necessary – at least for those who want a relaxed retirement and do not want to look for bottles in bins to get money. But is the state pension really finished? And does demographic change make private pensions essential? Or is the state pension just a victim of smart work by insurance companies, and with some reforms, could it still be the best way to keep the generation contract alive? In the following blinks, we explain how the decline of the state pension started and why demographic change is almost meaningless for the state pension. We explain, among other things,

why private pension plans – against common belief – can make old-age poverty even more likely,

why the state pay-as-you-go system is the safer system, and

how this system can be saved.

## THE FINANCE INDUSTRY'S ARGUMENTS AND THE LATER CUTS TO THE STATE PENSION OPENED THE WAY FOR PRIVATE PENSIONS.

Since the 1957 pension reform, the pay-as-you-go system in the state pension insurance has worked well. Workers pay as much as is needed for people retired or sick. 52 million insured people pay for 20 million pensioners – around 250 billion euros per year. Each year, 1.3 million new pensions are added, and the same number of other benefits are removed: old-age pensions, disability pensions, orphan pensions, cures, and rehab.An even if the contribution rate rose from 14% in 1960 to 20% in 2013, the buying power of each person is much higher today despite inflation and higher pension payments. The system is also crisis-proof – whether it is an internet bubble burst, financial market crash, or government debt. As long as salaries are paid, money flows into the pension fund. This money is paid out immediately as pensions – there is no saving pot that could be lost in a stock market crash.After reunification, the system faced criticism, especially because of high unemployment in the new federal states. The result: fewer workers paid less for more early-retired unemployed people, so the contribution rate rose. Financial companies turned the logic the other way. They said: higher pension contributions raise employers' labor costs, making workers too expensive – the state pension causes unemployment and contributions should be cut.With success: Gerhard Schröder's Agenda 2010 lowered the benefits level of the state pension and limited the future rise of the contribution rate to 20%. But a lower contribution rate meant less money coming into the system. On top of that, demographic change with more elderly and fewer young people lowered the state pension and led to more old-age poverty. The finance industry got what they wanted: private pensions became necessary. Schröder's government introduced the Riester pension as a private supplement and forced people to take personal responsibility.

## THE FINANCE INDUSTRY FUNDS SCIENTISTS AND THINK TANKS TO "PROVE" THE FAILURE OF THE STATE PENSION.

The main argument against the state pension is the "demography trap": too few children – who will pay contributions – face too many pensioners who live longer. Without this fear of demography, Schröder’s government would not have lowered pension levels or frozen contributions.Financial companies especially benefit from cutting the state pension because business from fear of old-age poverty is booming: Germans already have 34 million private pension insurance contracts – worth 50 billion euros a year.It is no surprise that finance companies pay think tanks and scientists who publish studies "proving" the importance of private pensions and how unsafe the pay-as-you-go state pension is.In talk shows and newspapers in the late 1990s, many experts predicted the end of the system. For example, Professor Bernd Raffelhüschen said the contribution rate would rise to 33.46% by 2035 – very specific. He predicted 21.1% in 2011, but in 2013, it was less than 19%. It is suspicious that Raffelhüschen leads the "Research Center for Generation Contracts," which is funded by insurance companies like HDI-Gerling and ERGO, where he is also on the supervisory board.Another expert, Professor Bert Rürup, who advised Schröder on demographics and pensions, was linked to finance: chief economist at AWD financial services, on the supervisory board at AXA Pensionskasse, and co-owner of the Maschmeyer-Rürup consultancy for pensions.The former Mannheim research institute on economics and demographic change always concluded that pensions must be privatized. It is funded by the German insurance industry association.Studies that are biased and lobby work by the finance industry made the state pension look bad and offered private pensions as the solution.

## DEMOGRAPHIC CHANGE DOES NOT THREATEN THE STATE PENSION BY ITSELF, AS THE PAY-AS-YOU-GO SYSTEM CAN BE SAFE EVEN WITH A CHANGING POPULATION.

People believe that the population is shrinking and Germany is aging, so pensions will become too expensive. But general news about shrinking population is nonsense because no one can really say how many people will live in Germany in 50 years. The Federal Statistical Office changes its predictions every three years because past forecasts varied by over 11 million people depending on migration and birth rates. This is not a solid basis for criticizing the social system. From 1995 to 2010, Germany's population even grew by 100,000.People under 18 fell by one-third and those over 65 doubled, but this does not threaten the pay-as-you-go system. Since 1960, life expectancy has increased by ten years on average. This means people can work and want to work longer, paying contributions for a longer time.Despite higher pension contribution rates from 14% in 1960 to 20% in 2010, Germany now has more wealth and a better social system than before. The individual’s buying power is much higher now because productivity grows about 1.5% per year. So even higher pension rates in the future are no problem: if rates rise to 30% by 2060, real income after prices and wages would still be 40% higher than now.Opponents of the state pension forget that it depends not on the number of young and old people but on the relation of contributors to pension receivers. Birth rates do not matter—what matters is if the born people get work. If unemployment fell, there would be enough contributors.The pay-as-you-go pension system is safe even with a changing population.

## SCHRÖDER'S AGENDA 2010 LOWERED THE STATE PENSION AND PRIVATIZED PENSIONS.

When Gerhard Schröder became chancellor in 1998, the debate about demographic change and the state pension's problems was already strong, even though the pension was still safe. The SPD party rejected pension privatization in its program, but Schröder supported it in his “New Center” manifesto. Not a surprise: Schröder was close to Carsten Maschmeyer, head of AWD financial services, who supported Schröder with money and PR campaigns.At the Chancellery, Schröder weakened the pay-as-you-go defenders. Oskar Lafontaine was pushed out and the social policy proponent Rudolf Dreßler did not get the labor and pension minister job; instead, Walter Riester became minister. Riester was a unionist and not a pension expert like Dreßler. Today he sits on the supervisory board of Union Investment and gave paid talks to insurance companies during his minister time.Many of Schröder’s people were closely tied to the finance industry: the finance committee head was an adviser at Hamburg-Mannheimer and some social experts sat on Allianz’s advisory board.A key measure of Agenda 2010 was "contribution stability": it said pension rates could not go above 22% until 2030. This cut pensions by one quarter and made old-age poverty likely. The gap was to be covered by the “Riester pension,” a private pension with state support. The state has spent 17 billion euros so far on Riester subsidies.The state pension cuts were not necessary but politically wanted. Employers save money because of low rates, while workers are pushed into private pensions.The only clear winners of Agenda 2010 are employers and especially finance companies selling private pensions. The pay-as-you-go system lost, with much less money going into social funds.

## PRIVATE PENSION INSURERS PROMISE HIGH PROFITS BUT GUARANTEE ALMOST NOTHING.

Insurers attract customers with big profit promises, but the truth is different: The "Map-Report" compared 214 different pension insurance contracts and only two paid out more than promised. 211 times, insurers paid less – up to 32% below what they promised.The only guarantee insurers give is the guaranteed interest rate on the savings part – the monthly payment minus costs. In 2012, the guaranteed interest rate dropped from 2.25% to 1.75%. This is often too low to get back all paid contributions – so guaranteed payouts are often less than what was paid in. Inflation also lowers value. With the guaranteed interest, after about 24 years of paying regularly, the insurance company covers its costs. For unit-linked pension plans, insurers do not guarantee anything.Insurers add a so-called profit share to make benefits look better. But no one knows how high it will be. Insurers can legally set it to zero. They just put contributions in a fund for refunds which does not earn profit, so they don’t share any interest.Before signing a pension insurance, add all contributions over the whole time and compare with the guaranteed sum to see costs.Insurers depend on financial markets. They invest in bonds and bank papers – in a crisis they can lose billions and may be unable to pay pensions. In 2008’s crisis, private pension providers lost about 4 trillion euros worldwide. If banks crash, insurers could lose money and can’t pay pensions.Most people with private pensions lose much of their money. They get promised a lot but guaranteed almost nothing.

## THE COSTS OF PRIVATE PENSIONS ARE VERY HIGH AND CUSTOMERS GET LOW RETURNS.

With private pensions, customers barely earn good returns because much money disappears in costs.No law or authority limits insurers’ costs; they set costs themselves. On average about 10% of paid money goes to the insurer. For Riester contracts, it is 20%. For a 30-year contract with 100 euros per month, costs can be 10,000 euros. Because costs are paid at the start, customers pay for ten years with no return, losing interest.In unit-linked pensions, insurers take even more – in the first years only 30–40% of deposits go into stocks. Not only insurers but also fund managers and banks profit.There are three cost types: Start-up costs are based on total payments, usually 5–7%. For 40 years paying 100,000 euros, that means 5,000 to 7,000 euros. Because costs are upfront, they reduce savings. It takes about three years before money really goes to savings.Ongoing management fees are monthly and reduce the saved amount by up to one quarter. Even on paid pensions, insurers take monthly management fees until death.Very tricky are installment costs: insurers calculate clients pay yearly. But clients usually pay monthly, which adds 6% interest cost. For 100 euros per month over 30 years, that’s 2,160 euros extra.So, clients start real saving only years later, causing low returns and small pensions.

## INSURERS EARN FROM CANCELLATION PROFITS BECAUSE MANY CUSTOMERS CANCEL PRIVATE PENSIONS EARLY.

A private pension only pays off if you pay regularly until retirement. Breaks due to divorce, unemployment, or job changes always hurt.The average customer cancels after seven years. Overall, 80% of pension contracts end before the time. And insurers profit from this.Why? Customers get less money back than paid when they cancel. High start-up costs prevent profitable saving early on. Only after 13 years does the surrender value – money returned at cancellation – exceed contributions. Insurers also charge cancellation fees that reduce this value.Some customers get no money back at all. On average, they lose one-third of what they paid. But insurers like early cancellations: after 5 years, they cover start-up costs and don’t pay interest, making cancellation profits. For insurers, six clients who sign for 5 years and cancel are more profitable than one who pays for 30 years.No wonder that "replacement" is common: agents encourage clients to cancel “bad” old contracts and buy a new “better” contract.“Replacement” is a clear insurer strategy. Only six million new pension contracts a year can be sold because many customers cancel old ones. Insurers earn about 8 billion euros yearly from start-up fees of new contracts.Early cancellation brings huge financial losses for customers.

## INSURERS PLAN WITH HIGHER LIFE EXPECTANCY THAN STATS SAY, SO THEY PAY LESS PENSION PER YEAR.

Private pensions work like state pensions: at retirement, customers get monthly pension until death. Because one cannot withdraw all savings at once, people need to live very long for such contracts to pay off.Statistically, life expectancy in Germany is 88.1 years for women and 83.6 for men. If calculated with those numbers, a 35-year-old man paying 100 euros monthly to a pension would get a guaranteed 225 euros monthly at 67. But in reality, he would get only 170 euros because insurers use their own tables. These are made by the German actuaries association, who add about 10 years to average life expectancies: a man is assumed to live 93.7 years, a woman 97.8 years.This is very optimistic and good for business: longer life means lower monthly pension from saved money, up to 30% less. This keeps insurers safe if customers live longer than average. But more likely people die earlier than expected. In that case, insurers save on pension payments – these "mortality profits" were 7.6 billion euros in 2010.So, if you want a high pension, you must pay higher contributions to cover life expectancy differences.

## MOST CUSTOMERS LOSE MONEY WITH THE RIESTER PENSION.

Schröder’s government introduced the Riester pension as a state-subsidized private pension to offset cuts in the state pension. Riester promises a high pension: After 37 years paying 1,200 euros per year with a 7.8% average return, savers might get 250,000 euros.But Riester also uses the 1.75% guaranteed interest rate on the savings part. Riester pay-off works only if stocks rise and savings reach expected returns. But for example, Union Investment, the market leader, earned only 3% over 10 years.After the 2008 crash, insurers moved Riester stocks into safe but low-interest investments. Savers get back mostly only what they paid.State claims to give up to 26,000 euros in subsidies for Riester products. In fact, support is small: child subsidies go only to parents getting child benefit. Singles without children get only 154 euros per year.Riester subsidies do not cover all contracts: only about 9 of 16 million get allowances, and only 60% get full ones – that means only 5.4 million get full support. Average earners get about 20% per contract, 80% pay out of pocket.So far, the state spent 17 billion euros on Riester, but much flows to agent commissions and administration, which cost 20% with Riester, twice as much as other private pensions. Most Riester savers just get back their contributions, adjusted for inflation, this is a big loss. It would be better to save money at home.Riester, much praised, failed and even increases old-age poverty.

## THE PAY-AS-YOU-GO SYSTEM IS FAIR, SOLIDARITY-BASED, CRISIS-PROOF, AND GUARANTEES A PENSION.

The “generation contract” is a social agreement based on solidarity. It is the basis of the pay-as-you-go state pension: those who earn pay as much as pensioners need. No profit is made: money that comes in flows out immediately as pensions. You don’t need to save. Once you pay into the fund, you are insured and have a pension right.Because the system is based on contributions from wages, money always flows in because wages never drop like stock prices. Even in the 2008 crisis, the state pension had steady income and payments. As long as salaries are paid, pensions can be paid.Another advantage: contributions paid out become pensions and flow quickly back into the economy – the system helps stabilize the economy and keeps buying power. Private pensions build savings and take large amounts of money out of the economy.Costs are also low for the state pension. Administrative costs are only 1.5%. Private pensions cost 10-20%.Private pensions guarantee 1.75% interest while the state system has an average return of 3%. So the pay-as-you-go system is more profitable.Opponents want a fully funded pension dependent on financial markets and companies. This would need 5 trillion euros to build a capital fund. The effects would be bad: this large sum would not be available anymore, consumption would fall, interest rates would drop, and returns would be low.A fully funded pension is also sensitive to financial crises – if capital drops, no pensions can be paid. The pay-as-you-go system is crisis-proof and helps the economy with its constant money flow.

## THE STATE PENSION MUST BE REFORMED TO MAKE IT SAFE AGAIN.

The current reduced state pension and partly private pensions will not stop old-age poverty. Only a reformed state pension can guarantee a standard pension of 70% of average net income.By 2030, contribution rates might rise to 26%, but the economy can handle this. Employers treat this like a 0.1% yearly wage increase – jobs are not at risk.The pay-as-you-go system depends on the ratio of contributors to pensioners. Fighting unemployment will help save the pension. If just half of the 5 million unemployed and 5 million low-paid workers found good jobs, the "demography problem" would vanish. Low-wage jobs must also be fought because low earners get low pensions.State pensions are solidarity-based, so all should pay contributions: employees, civil servants, and the self-employed. The last two groups do not pay into the system now.It is also fair to redistribute from rich to poor. In western states, high earners pay contributions only up to 62,700 euros yearly income; in new states, it is 57,600 euros. It would be fair to remove this limit: everyone pays contributions on 100% of income, but pensions for high earners would be capped. This would give higher pensions to average earners and a raised minimum pension for low earners. Contributions should also come from all income, including capital income like interest and dividends.The state of Baden-Württemberg suggests a "pension account" with the German pension fund as an alternative to unprofitable private pensions. Financial experts at the pension fund would manage this money without profit greed, commissions, or high start and administration costs.However, the federal government blocks this because the state would compete with finance companies – the government does not want to hurt their business. Except for the party DIE LINKE, no party wants to discuss or make these changes, even though they could stop old-age poverty.

## SUMMARY

The main message of these blinks is: The partial privatization of pensions was wanted by the finance industry. It started the decline of the state pension for profit. Private pensions lose money for customers and increase old-age poverty. The pay-as-you-go system is safe and fair but must be reformed.What you can do: Do not rely on private pensions alone.Private pensions with high costs and low guaranteed interest will not improve the small state pension much. Your private pension may be enough only if you pay every contribution and the insurer’s profits are high. But this is uncertain. Think about other ways and extra "pillars" for your pension.Compare costs of private pension providers.Costs vary a lot. Look carefully at fees and charges for each provider. Add up contributions over time and compare with guaranteed payments to get the cost ratio. Consumer advice services like Stiftung Warentest publish pension insurance comparisons.Pay yearly to save installment interest.If possible, pay annually, not monthly. Monthly payments add about 5% interest, costing thousands over time. If yearly is too much, paying every 3 or 6 months also saves some interest.Do you have feedback? We look forward to hearing what you think about our blinks! Just write an email to remember@blinkist.com with Die Vorsorgelüge as the subject and share your thoughts.

## FURTHER READING

To read more: Pension or Wealth by Bodo Schäfer The study results by Balodis and Hühne about private pensions are very sobering, while the state pension looks optimistic. Bodo Schäfer is even stronger in his 2016 book Pension or Wealth. The blinks from it say no one should rely on the state pension but take financial freedom into their own hands. If you still doubt any pension plans, this is the right reading for you.